---
layout: post
title: Blackjack
---

## Application of Deep Q-Networks in Solving Blackjack

## Abstract



## Introduction

### Purpose

Blackjack, also known as 21, is a popular card game in casinos worldwide. It presents a unique challenge to artificial intelligence due to its combination of easy-to-understand rules and complex strategic play based on incomplete information. This project aims to explore the application of Deep Q-Networks (DQN), a type of deep reinforcement learning algorithm, in devising optimal strategies for playing Blackjack. The objective is to train an intelligent agent that can make decisions that maximize potential earnings over many games, highlighting the practical application of DQN in environments with elements of both chance and skill.

### Brief overview of Blackjack Rules

- **Objective**: Aim to get a player's hand's total point value as close to 21 as possible without exceeding it.
- **Gameplay**: Both the player and the dealer start with two cards. The player's cards are usually visible, while the dealer has one card face up and one face down.
- **Player Decisions**: Players can choose to "Hit" (take additional cards) or "Stand" (keep their current hand).
- **Winning the Game**: At the end of the game, if a player's total exceeds 21, it's a "bust," and the player loses. Otherwise, the higher total between the player and the dealer wins.

## Methodology

### Environment

The environment specific to Blackjack implements the traditional rules of the game. It manages the cards, player actions, and the scoring system unique to Blackjack.

#### State Representation

In this environment, the state is represented by the scores of the player's hand and the dealer's visible card. This representation is crucial as it provides the agent with the necessary information to make decisions based on the current game context.

#### Action Management

The legal actions in Blackjack, namely "hit" and "stand," are managed by the environment, which presents these options to the agent based on the game's current state. This allows the agent to assess its strategy and decide on the next move.

#### Reward Calculation

At the end of each game round, the environment calculates the results and issues rewards based on the outcomes—win, loss, or tie. These rewards are pivotal for the reinforcement learning process, as they provide feedback to the agent about the effectiveness of its decisions.

### Deep Q-Network Architecture

The Q-Network and the Target Network share an identical architecture but maintain separate parameters. The network consists of a series of fully connected layers with tanh activation functions to introduce non-linearity, allowing the model to learn more complex patterns in the data. The input to this network is the state representation of the Blackjack game, which includes numerical data encoding the player’s and dealer’s hand values.

- **Input Layer**: The input layer accepts the state of the game, which is a vector that encodes the current scores of the player and dealer.
- **Hidden Layers**: Multiple hidden layers are configured, where the size and number of these layers can be adjusted. Each layer uses a tanh activation function to provide non-linear transformation of inputs.
- **Output Layer**: The final layer is a linear layer that outputs the Q-values for each possible action in the given state. The number of actions in Blackjack is typically two: hit or stand.

### Training Process

The training of the DQN involves several key components and processes that enable the agent to learn effectively:

- **Replay Memory**: A crucial component of our DQN agent is the replay memory. It stores experiences observed during the interaction with the environment, which consists of tuples containing states, actions, rewards, subsequent states, and done signals. This approach mitigates the issues related to correlated data and non-stationary distributions.
- **Experience Sampling**: For each training step, a batch of experiences is randomly sampled from the replay memory. This batch is used to perform updates on the Q-Network, making the learning process more stable and efficient.
- **Epsilon-Greedy Policy**: A policy commonly used in DQN training, the epsilon-greedy strategy, is employed to balance exploration and exploitation. This policy starts with a high likelihood of selecting random actions and gradually increases the propensity to take actions as suggested by the model, as epsilon decays.
- **Loss Calculation**: The loss is computed as the mean squared error between the predicted Q-values by the Q-Network for the actions taken and the target Q-values. The targets are calculated using the reward received for the action and the discounted highest Q-value of the next state as predicted by the Target Network, unless the episode has ended.
- **Network Updates**: The weights of the Q-Network are updated using backpropagation to minimize the loss. The Target Network's weights are updated less frequentlyto the weights of the Q-Network to provide stable training targets.
- **Optimizer**: The Adam optimizer is used for adjusting the weights of the neural network, selected for its effectiveness in handling sparse gradients and adaptive learning rate capabilities.

## Experiments and Results



## Conclusion

The project applies a Deep Q-Network (DQN) to solve Blackjack, aiming to explore the capabilities of reinforcement learning in a game dominated by both stochastic elements and strategic depth. Thre DQN agent demonstrated significant learning progress throughout the experiment, as evidenced by increasing win rates and average rewards over time. These results underscore the potential of DQN to develop nuanced strategies that can outperform traditional methods in complex decision environments.

